{% include mathjax %}

## Chaitin's method

### Intro

Register allocation via color graph can be briefly descripbed as follow:
- Build interference graph
- Simplify the graph by coalesce
- Try to find a node `n` where `degree(n) < k`, k is available registers
    number
- If found such `n`, then remove node `n`, and remove associated edges
    from the graph(reducing the size of graph)
- If not found, then some regs may need to be spilled/reloaded
- Repeat these steps until coloring succeeds

### Build Interference Graph

Before this, need to do liveness analysis. Better to do this backward.

Once liveness analysis is done, then, for every reg definition, add edges to the
graph:

\\[
g += \{ \{d,l\} : l \in LivenessSet\}
\\]

`LivenessSet` can changed at each instruction.

### Coalesce
This step is trying to removed some unnecessary copy. This operation can reduce
some instructions, and it may reduce some degree of nodes.

For example,

```
LR7 := LR8
```

if LR7 is not conflict with LR8, then we can replace LR7 with LR8, avoiding the
copy. And if there is some node who is conflicting with LR7 and LR8 before, now
it's only conflicting with LR7, which means the conflict degree is reducing.

### Spill and Reload
If can't find a coloring for the graph, then some nodes must be spilled.

First, need a method to decide which node to spill. Chaitin's method, is to use
the use frequency to measure the spill cost.

Then mark the register R as spilled. Then rewrite the program, for every
definition of R, need to add a `SPILL` instruction, and for every use of R,
need to add a `RELOAD` instruction.

Why do spill and reload works? Because everytime spilled a reg, will create a
new node, aka doing a liveness splitting. Which will reduce the conflict degree
of the node. So as the degree goes down, the coloring is more likely to succeed.

